.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-only
.\"
.\" Zenritme
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 rezky_nightky (oxyzenQ)
.\"
.Dd June 2026
.Dt ZENRITME 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm zenritme
.Nd calm terminal timer, stopwatch, and Pomodoro ritual
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm zenritme
.Op Fl -timer-up
.Nm zenritme
.Fl -timer-down Ar DURATION
.Nm zenritme
.Op Fl -stopwatch
.Nm zenritme
.Op Fl -pomodoro Op Ar FOCUS BREAK
.Nm zenritme
.Fl -sound-test
.Nm zenritme
.Fl -check-update
.Nm zenritme
.Fl -help | Fl V | Fl -version
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a premium terminal timer, stopwatch, and Pomodoro ritual application
with built-in procedural notification sounds.
It uses zero external Rust dependencies and is designed for calm,
focused terminal workflows.
.Pp
Four modes are available: a count-up timer, a count-down timer, a
stopwatch, and a full Pomodoro ritual with configurable focus/break
cycles.
.Pp
Interactive controls while running:
.Bl -tag -width "p         " -compact
.It q / Esc
Quit the session
.It p
Pause or resume
.It r
Reset the current session
.El
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width "--timer-down"
.It Fl -timer-up
Start a count-up timer that increments indefinitely.
.It Fl -timer-down Ar DURATION
Start a count-down timer.
A duration argument in the format described below is required.
.It Fl -stopwatch
Start a stopwatch.
.It Fl -pomodoro Op Ar FOCUS BREAK
Start a Pomodoro ritual.
Optional positional arguments set focus and break durations
(legacy syntax).
Session flow:
FOCUS 1/N -> SHORT BREAK 1/N -> ... -> FOCUS N/N -> LONG BREAK -> COMPLETE.
.It Fl -sound-test
Play all four built-in notification sounds and exit.
.It Fl -check-update , Fl -check-updated
Query the GitHub releases API and report whether a newer version
is available.
This command is read-only and does not download or install anything.
Requires
.Xr curl 1
on the system PATH.
.It Fl -help , Fl h
Print usage information and exit.
.It Fl V , Fl -version
Print version, build target, copyright, license, and source URL.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
Options may appear before or after the mode flag.
.Bl -tag -width "--sound-profile"
.It Fl -theme Ar THEME
Color theme.
One of:
.Em void , ember , aura , forest , mono .
Default:
.Em void .
.It Fl -view Ar VIEW
Display view mode.
One of:
.Em minimal , orbit , cinematic .
Default:
.Em orbit .
.It Fl -sound-profile Ar PROFILE
Sound profile.
One of:
.Em calm , silent .
Default:
.Em calm .
.It Fl -mute
Suppress all notification sounds for the session,
overriding any sound profile.
.It Fl -focus Ar DURATION
Pomodoro focus session length.
Default: 25m.
.It Fl -break Ar DURATION
Pomodoro short break length.
Default: 5m.
.It Fl -long-break Ar DURATION
Pomodoro long break length (after final focus cycle).
Default: 15m.
.It Fl -cycles Ar N
Number of focus sessions per Pomodoro round.
Default: 4.
.El
.Sh DURATION FORMAT
Durations are specified as a number followed by a unit suffix:
.Bl -tag -width "10m" -compact
.It 30s
30 seconds
.It 10m
10 minutes
.It 1h
1 hour
.El
.Sh POMODORO EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
zenritme --pomodoro
zenritme --pomodoro 3s 2s
zenritme --pomodoro --cycles 4
zenritme --pomodoro --focus 45m --break 10m --long-break 20m --cycles 3
zenritme --pomodoro --focus 3s --break 2s --long-break 4s --cycles 2 \\
    --theme aura --view cinematic
.Ed
.Sh SOUND PROFILES
.Bl -tag -width "calm"
.It Em calm
All notification sounds enabled (default).
.It Em silent
All notification sounds suppressed.
.El
.Pp
The
.Fl -mute
flag overrides any profile to silent.
Per-event sound file overrides are available via environment variables
(see
.Sx ENVIRONMENT
below).
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width "ZENRITME_SOUND_COMPLETE"
.It Ev ZENRITME_SOUND_START
Override start sound file path.
.It Ev ZENRITME_SOUND_PAUSE
Override pause sound file path.
.It Ev ZENRITME_SOUND_PHASE
Override phase switch sound file path.
.It Ev ZENRITME_SOUND_COMPLETE
Override completion sound file path.
.It Ev ZENRITME_SOUND_FILE
Global fallback sound file for all events.
.It Ev ZENRITME_VISUAL_BELL
Set to
.Em 1
to enable visual bell (screen flash) on notifications.
.El
.Pp
Resolution order: event-specific env -> global env -> built-in.
Override paths must be local file paths; no URLs or network fetching.
.Sh FILES
Install locations (respects PREFIX and DESTDIR):
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "${PREFIX}/share/man/man1/zenritme.1" -compact
.It Pa ${PREFIX}/bin/zenritme
Release binary
.It Pa ${PREFIX}/share/zenritme/sounds/
Built-in sound assets
.It Pa ${PREFIX}/share/man/man1/zenritme.1
This manpage
.It Pa ${PREFIX}/share/bash-completion/completions/zenritme
Bash completions
.It Pa ${PREFIX}/share/zsh/site-functions/_zenritme
Zsh completions
.It Pa ${PREFIX}/share/fish/vendor_completions.d/zenritme.fish
Fish completions
.El
.Sh EXIT BEHAVIOR
Pressing
.Em q
or
.Em Esc
exits the session and reliably restores terminal state via RAII guards
(TerminalGuard, TempCleanupGuard).
.Pp
Signal-level termination (SIGINT, SIGKILL) may bypass Rust's Drop
cleanup, leaving the terminal in raw mode.
If the terminal appears stuck, press Ctrl+J, type
.Li stty sane ,
and press Enter, or open a new terminal window.
.Sh SOURCE
https://github.com/oxyzenQ/zenritme
.Sh LICENSE
GPL-3.0-only